

<!-- Note -->
I know, I know. I am the person that's between you and your drinks. I
may even be the person between you and your hummus, and in this
country that's much worse.

And I know that some of you might be thinking, what the fuck is this
guy talking about and why is he here? Isn't this a technology
conference, a *DevOps* meeting no less, where we're all about
incrementally improving things without breaking things? What does that
have to do with creativity?

Well, lots. But you would be totally forgiven if you thought
otherwise, because there are two very common misconceptions about
creativity. Very wrong ones, but still very common.

One is that creativity is somehow the domain of the arts, of music,
drama, dance, theater, and so on.

The other is that creativity always happens in big leaps — Mozart
composing a big symphony, Stephen King writing a new book, Zaha Hadid
designing a beautiful building.

The opposite is true. There is room for creativity in everything, and
it comes in big leaps and in small increments. Both are equally
valuable. Creativity is...


> Creativity is the process of having original ideas that have value.

<!-- Note -->
Those are not my own words; they are the words of


![Sir Ken Robinson, speaking in 2009 at the Creative Company
 Conference, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a1/Sir_Ken_Robinson_%28cropped%29.jpg)

<!-- Note -->
... Sir Ken Robinson, one of the most eminent voices for education
reform in the UK in the late 20th and early 21st century, who left us
much too soon in 2020.

Photo credit: [Sebastiaan ter
Burg](https://www.flickr.com/people/31013861@N00), Wikimedia Commons,
[CC BY-SA
2.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/deed.en), link: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sir_Ken_Robinson_(cropped).jpg 


<!-- Note -->
And Sir Ken made a very important point for why creativity —
specifically, *teaching* creativity to children — is so critical. It's
not some touchy-feely let's-all-be-artists hippy message either. He
simply said this: the purpose of education is to turn out adults that
can be valuable members of a society. And when a child enters school
he or she is about 12-15 years away from being expected to step out
into that role. So the purpose of education is to prepare you for the
world 12 to 15 years in the future when we have no idea what the
world will look like 1 year from now.

If I had visited you from the future a year ago, and given you
today's headlines to read, you would probably have dismissed me as a
lunatic. And you'd probably say the same to someone who dropped in on
you today and read you the headlines from 1 year out. And if
conversely you tried to sit down tonight and write the headlines for
June 13, 2023, you'll probably notice on the day that your predictions
were nowhere near actual events.

You have no idea what the world, or even your life, will look like
just 12 months from now. Make it five years or ten, and you won't have
the faintest shimmer of a clue. There is no certainty about your
future.

Now, there are three approaches to deal with this kind of uncertainty:

1. Fatalism. The idea that whatever happens will happen, you have no
   control over it, and therefore any attempt to wield any influence
   over your own life is doomed.

2. Control. The idea that you can achieve certainty in your life by
   planning everything and leaving nothing to chance.

3. Creativity. The idea that, although some events in your life (and
   the world) are beyond your influence, you will have the ideas
   needed to make the best of the twists and turns, good and bad, that
   life throws at you. That means that's you'll have the *original
   ideas that have value* that will help you exploit opportunities, and
   negotiate difficulties.

In comparing these, I'd maintain that fatalism is just a poor strategy
for life. The idea that everything is governed by some higher
authority is just alien to me and if I'd want to advocate fatalism,
I'd probably start a religion and get rich really quick.

And of the other two, I'd maintain that far superior to sticking to
the illusion of control is an approach favouring creativity, and those
same considerations also apply to the medium-term future of a
corporation. Nobody really knows what the future holds. There is no
certainty. The market can go either way, interest rates can explode
shattering your financing, you might close on an unexpected
opportunity that sends your business flying. In principle,
corporations could make the same considerations that apply to people,
and strive to foster creativity left, right, and centre.

I am routinely dismayed, though, by the fact that the approach heavily
favoured in management is one of control, to absurd ends. I think it's
obviously ludicrous to expect an engineering manager to "plan" what
their team will be working on 5 quarters from now, or a sales person
to "project" product sales next July. There are close to a million
things that could influence either outcome, and the person would have
to do the work equivalent to that of meteorologist predicting maritime
weather patterns for container ships, weeks and months out. Almost
nobody in business has the data, the time, the staff, and the budget
to do that.

So managers turn to metrics and KPIs and OKRs and whatever the
[TLA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-letter_acronym) du jour may
be, in a frantic quest to achieve some degree of certainty — a process
which, [as others have pointed
out](https://www.morebeyond.co.za/how-organisational-ocd-is-stamping-out-innovation/),
suffocates the creativity that's *really* needed to address a
constantly changing environment. The idea is that if you collect all
the metrics and do all the statistics and measure everything (in other
words, if you follow some "process" perfectly), you'll succeed.

That is so obviously non-sensical that the question becomes, *why the
hell does anyone think that this works?*

And I have a hypothesis on why that is so. I attribute it to an
institution that practically every manager has gone through, indeed,
one that practically *everyone* has gone through.

That institution is school.

I don't know about yours, but I can say one thing about my own school
education: *all* of my schooling can be summarized in just a few
sentences. Specifically, here's what school taught me:

1. Here is a set of rules.
2. Apply these rules, and you will succeed.
3. Apply the rules *perfectly,* and you will excel.

That applied no matter the subject. It was as true for maths as it was
for foreign language education, and for writing essays in history
class. Here's how it's done; do it this way and you'll succeed.

As it happens, I was good at applying rules. I succeeded in creative
writing even when my writing wasn't at all creative: I could spell, I
had good grammar, my writing had the expected structure, I understood
punctuation. As long as my writing was error-free, I made A's (or
rather, 1's, in [the school system I
inhabited](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grading_systems_by_country#Austria)). My
schoolmates might have written far better stories, but if in a couple
of pages they had three grammar errors and a few misplaced commas and
a couple of spelling glitches, they'd make C's (3's).

Now, there's nothing wrong with giving children a set of rules for
solving a problem, and then rewarding them for applying those rules
correctly.  The problem is with the idea that applying the rules
*perfectly* is where excellence lies. That the difference between
doing something well, and doing something *exceptionally* well, is
simply in the more perfect application of the rules.

That couldn't be farther from the truth. What distinguishes good
results from excellent ones is either that the excellent ones follow
the rules very well *and then add* a personal creative touch, or that
they deliberately bend or reject conventions and are great
nonetheless.

It gets worse. The people that school rewards the most — the ones it
considers the overachievers, the cream of the crop — are the ones who
can most perfectly follow the rules *everywhere.* We call them
straight-A students. I was one of them. There is absolutely no way
that any one child could have straight A's, if in school report cards
we applied an understanding of excellence that included
creativity. You cannot possibly be equally and exceptionally creative
in maths, science, languages, history, and all the other subjects you
take. *Straight* A's is what you get solely from industrious
compliance.

And now, in business, we are stuck between a rock and a hard
place. There is a whole generation of people under 35 who have gone
through this kind of schooling, but are increasingly disillusioned by
it — having understood that all their rules-compliance in school and
at university is not a guarantee for economic prosperity or even
financial security, and further that they can scarcely expect loyalty
from their company if the going gets rough, even if they follow *all*
the rules like a straight-A student.

But those same people are being managed by upper-level managers in
their late 40s and 50s who not only *have* achieved some degree of
financial stability, but who do believe that it was their education
that prepared them for it — and that as long as they continue to
meticulously apply a set of rules, everything will be fine and they
get to expect a promotion. And when given a new rule book --- say,
some new management fad imposed by a person of authority, akin to
their erstwhile teacher --- all they need to do is apply *those* rules
well, and it all will work for them, too. And the more industrious
compliance they apply to the rules in the book, the more likely it is
that results will not only be good, but excellent.

And if that rulebook includes collecting metrics everywhere and doing
misguided statistics on them, it will result in an inordinate amount
of busywork that kills the creativity that organizations *really*
need to succeed. And likely drive away the people that could
contribute exactly that kind of creativity.
